*Pathogen* is a generative web-based electroacoustic composition that
makes use of a clonal selection algorithm from the field of
immunocomputing. The piece can be understood as an audible artificial
immune system. The piece lets the listeners aesthetically experience
the dynamics of learning processes that are at the core of immune
systems. The variation of timbre and its musical development is the
emergent result of a biologically informed machine learning process.

The system is presented with one or more sonic pathogens that are
recorded by the listener. The system tries to adapt to the pathogens
by creating sonic antibodies that recreate certain sonic aspects
(timbre and pitch). However, the goal is not to resynthesize or
imitate the listener's sounds, but to couple the sound synthesis
process to the adaptation behavior in nonlinear ways giving rise to
varying timbres and textures.

The creation of antibodies takes place in an iterative evolutionary
process. In each iteration new sonic cells are produced by copying and
mutating the previous generation of antibodies. The offspring is
compared to the pathogen and the ones that match the pathogen most
closely will produce more offspring thus creating an adaptive
process. The process terminates if the affinity has crossed a certain
threshold and a long-term memory cell will be formed, which is sound
with a longer duration and which will be played repeatedly.

There are three types of antibodies:

1. Random plasma cells, that may be used as a basis for a clonal
   mutation process.

2. Iteratively produced clones that are compared to a specific
   pathogen that the system tries to adapt to.

3. Memory cells that remain once the adaptation has been completed.

The system is based on the CLONALG algorithms proposed by de Catro and
Von Zuben (*Learning and Optimization Using the Clonal Selection
Principle*, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 6,
NO. 3, JUNE 2002).
